=pod

=head1 NAME

InterMine::Cookbook::Templates::Recipe2 - Authoring Templates

=head1 NOT IMPLEMENTED YET

The features this section describes have B<not yet been implemented>. Please
check back regularly at L<http://www.intermine.org> to hear news of when
we release web-service user authentication.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use InterMine ('www.flymine.org/query/service', $user, $pass);

  my $query = InterMine->new_query;

  # define query here;

  $query->save_as_template(
      name  => 'Gene_To_Cure_For_Cancer',
      title => 'From a Gene Find the Cure for Cancer',
      description => 'Find the cure for cancer given a specific gene',
  );

  my $template = InterMine->template('Gene_To_Cure_For_Cancer');
      or die "Could not find template";

  # These methods are only available for templates authored by you
  $template->get_constraint('B')->hide;   # makes it uneditable, ie. invisible to others
  $template->get_constraint('C')->unhide; # The converse

  $template->save;

  my $results  = $template->results_with(value1 => 'Drosophila melanogaster');

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Any query that you describe in the API can be saved to your userprofile
at the webservice you are using as a template or saved query (see
L<InterMine::Cookbook::Recipe8>). As long as you have provided your login
information to the service, you will be able to access your saved
templates, upload new ones, and make changes to the ones you already have.

The procedure for saving a query as a template is to call C<save_as_template>
on it:

  $query->save_as_template;

If there are errors saving the template, an exception will be thrown,
describing the problem. One potential problem is the name - queries do not
need one but templates do - if you do not pass one to C<save_as_template>
the query will attempt to use its own name, and throw an exception if
it does not have one. If you edit a template and want to 

To edit template specific attributes, such as whether constraints are
editable or optional, you need to access it as a template, which means
loading it from the webservice. To change the values for these attributes
from their default values ('true' for editability and 'locked' for
switchability) you can call the C<hide> and C<unlock> methods. C<hide>
makes a constraint un-editable, and C<unlock> means that you can change
the active state of the constraint. C<unlock> returns the constraint
object to allow method chaining, as in the example below:

  $template->get_constraint('C')->unlock->switch_off;

The C<unhide> method is available for making a constraint you previously
set as un-editable editable again.

Any changes you make to the template locally must be updated on the webservice
by calling C<save> on the template. Again, this will throw an exception if there
are any issues saving the template.

Once saved, the template can be accessed and used as any other template,
both via the API and through the webapp. Don't forget that you can manage your
templates through the webapp interface, which in many cases might be more
straightforward than using this programmatic API.

=head1 CONCLUSION

Templates can be uploaded to the web-service, if you have provided your
login information. This means that these queries will be available
anywhere that the webservice is.

=cut
